---
layout: post
title:  "No one understands how to play this game show except for me"
date:   2024-03-08 00:48:01 -0700
category: blog
tags: AYTO SAT combinatorics "information theory"
---

Have you ever had a friend who just sucked at dating? Like their partners have glaring flaws you know should be dealbreakers? Someone who declares that they've finally found the love of their life each and every time they fall in love? The friend that's never reached a month with a single partner? Each relationship wilting faster than their matching succulents they'll never water. It's usually easier to just be a bystander and not get involved. After all, what's another night of eating ice cream and binging rom-coms with them after it's all over? But what if, instead, the consequences were much more drastic? What if your friend dating Mr. Wrong would cost **a million dollars?** Even worse, what if, in order to win the prize, *you* would need to date *him*?

This is the core of the conflict in the MTV dating reality TV show "Are You the One?" The show follows 10-11 single men and women living together in one house. Over the course of about ten weeks, the bachelors need to seek out who they think is their lifelong partner. The entire idea is laid bare in the title sequence, "If your perfect match was standing right in front of you, would you even know it?" Prior to entering the house, each of the contestants gave interviews for matchmakers to pair each man and woman together as a "perfect match." If all the singles find their perfect matches, then the entire group splits a million dollar cash prize.

To guide the contestants, each week the group declares who the perfect matches are in a ceremony. The producers reveal how many of the pairings are truly "perfect" but not which couples. If none of the couples are "perfect," the bachelors lose a portion of their winnings. In addition, individual couples can find confirmation of their legitimacy if this couple performs well enough in a weekly challenge and the others vote for them to go into the "Truth Booth." If they are revealed to be a perfect match, they spend the rest of the competition in a honeymoon suite together. However, if they are not, then they stay in the house and must continue to find who their perfect match is.

Watching the bachelors play the game and try so earnestly at finding love amongst themselves made me wonder how close they actually all were at finding their perfect matches. After all, with ten men and ten women, there are only 10! possibilities, roughly 3.6 million different ways to match up. With so many possible outcomes, I wondered what was the probability that the couples are immediately faced with a blackout. That is, how many different ways are there so each pair is not a perfect match? To help answer this question, we can use a special tool from combinatorics: the subfactorial. From [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derangement), the subfactorial of a number n is the number of permutations of n elements not in their original position. If we imagine the original position to be all the perfect matches, then there are ten subfactorial possibilities. As it turns out, the subfactorial of a number is actually equal to its factorial divided by Euler's constant e and rounded to the nearest number. This means the probability of immediately getting a blackout on the first ceremony is approximately 1/e or about 0.368.

The probabilities of getting any number of lights can be similarly calculated by multiplying by 10 Choose (the number of lights). The expected number of lights at the first ceremony would be exactly 1 light.

|Number of lights|Possibilities|
|:--------------:|:-----------:|
|        0       |   1334961   |
|        1       |   1334960   |
|        2       |    667485   |
|        3       |    222480   |
|        4       |     55650   |
|        5       |     11088   |
|        6       |      1890   |
|        7       |       240   |
|        8       |        45   |
|        9       |         0   |
|       10       |         1   |

> Of course, this doesn't account for the information gained from sending a couple to the Truth Booth so the expected number of lights at the first ceremony is a little more than 1.

Finding the number of possibilities after just the first ceremony is nice but it would be cool to see how many possibilities shrink as more couples are sent to the Truth Booth and more ceremonies are held. Of course, even calculating the number of possibilities after two ceremonies can be extremely difficult depending on the couples chosen in each. Thankfully, this problem can be easily translated into a SAT formula. Although SAT problems are NP-hard, we can use a program called a SAT solver to brute-force solve them anyways. For this problem, I used Z3 which is a SAT solver developed by Microsoft since I'm already familiar with it. You can view my code [here!](https://example.com)

<!--In season 9, we start with eleven men and women with 11! possible matchings (39,916,800). The first couple sent to the Truth Booth, was not a perfect match reducing the possibilities to 36,288,000 (this comes from 11! - 10! since we lose all 10! possibilities where the couple is a perfect match). In the first ceremony, they did not have any perfect matches further reducing the number to less than 14,684,570 possibilities. I have no solid numbers for week 2 but the number of possibilities must have continued to shrink. Prior to the week 3 ceremony, my program enumerated at least 218,000 possibilities until I got bored running it (this took about 3 days to run). After the third ceremony, there are exactly 68,042-->

<!-- This already presents a unique dynamic from other game shows, the group is incentivized to cooperate rather than compete. There shouldn't be any reason for conflict to flare up, especially when it would jeopardize their winnings. Unfortunately, it's not that simple. Players often disagree on who they should be paired with, evolving into verbal and physical altercations as well as property damage. -->





